Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Tri Munfe. He's a journalist
and policy analyst turned media entrepreneur and writer, and
today we're going to talk about his book, Why
We Think What We Think, The Unexpected Origins of
Our Deepest Beliefs. So Turri, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to
everyone. Ricardo, it's a great pleasure to be here
and as a long-term fan. Um, IT'S also a
great privilege, so I'm pleased to meet you almost
in real life.
Well, thank you for the kind words. So, um,
I mean, basically what you explore in your book
is how people form their opinions and I mean,
what's behind it and all of that. So, uh,
but first of all, Well, I would like to
get, I would like to ask you, what is
an opinion? I mean, how do you treat uh
an opinion? Do you treat it as a statement
of fact or is it different from that?
It's the, it's, it's the exact opposite of exactly
that. So, um, uh, the, the, the way that
I've, I've, I've explained it to myself is, Um,
the fact that Charles Windsor is king of the
United Kingdom and Commonwealth and defender of the faith
and goodness knows what else is a statement of
fact. Whether you think that's a good thing or
not, that's a statement of opinion. So, so, uh,
it, it's, it's, it's, but, but I use opinion
in the most common sense of the word, so
something that you feel. Which is a value judgment,
which is not based upon a fact. So those
can be beliefs, they can be views, they can
be perspectives, they can be opinions, they can be
values, but they're not tied to demonstrable fact.
Uh, IT'S interesting that in your book, uh, and
I mean, I, I also tend to have this
approach to opinions and people's beliefs more generally that
I've basically developed through the course of doing my
podcast and talking with the psychologists, anthropologists, and other
cognitive scientists and other people like that, but, uh
If I understand it correctly, the way you approach
how people form opinions in your book is not
really that people tend to weigh in evidence that
much, but it's more based on socialization, social identity,
and other sorts of social and psychological factors,
right? Ricardo, yes, you're, you're, you're bang on, but
I want to come back a little bit because.
Um, HUMANS are spectacularly good at weighing evidence and
running through logic and debating carefully and thinking rationally
about things. But that's, that's the self-conception that we
love. Yeah, that's the idea we would love to
have of ourselves, and it's true, in large part
it's true, but there's also an enormous realm of
other external influences which have a massive impact on
our opinions and beliefs and values which we, which
have nothing to do with reason. And so what
my book is, it takes for granted that we're
good at reasoning and humans are spectacularly good at
reasoning. What it tries to do is to look
at all the other things which influence our beliefs
and opinions. All the non-rational influences on our opinions,
which are in many instances, extremely deep and have
very, very deep impact on what we think, but
also what we do, how we behave, what we
think of as valuable.
Do you also have the sense that when people
use reason or reasoning most of the time their
goal is to come up with reasons to give
to other people as to explain their behavior or
to justify their beliefs and not so much to
uncover the truth. I mean, do you also have
that sense or
not? So you interviewed an exceptional cognitive scientist on
your podcast called Daniel Sperber, who's a Frenchman who
I also interviewed, and he did a spectacular book
with Hugo Mercier called The Enigma of Reason. And
let me just unpack that quickly. Pacheer Dan, I
hope he doesn't think I screwed it up too
much, but where, what Hugo and Dan sat down
to look at was the fact that we have
terrible cognitive flaws. We're really bad at reasoning in
all sorts of ways. We have confirmation bias, we
have halo bias. There's actually on, on Wikipedia, the
page on cognitive biases is 100 items long. I
mean, we're really not very good at these things,
um. And um Hugo and Dan sat down and
went, hang on, this doesn't quite make sense because,
you know, we've built computers which are now cleverer
than we are and we've got a man on
the moon and we can fly around the world
and you we've cured cancer, cholera and God knows
what else. So it looks like actually we are
pretty good at reasoning, but maybe the ways in
which we understood how reasoning worked are wrong. And
so what Dan and Hugo say is that uh
and what they've sort of proved is that reason.
Our self-conception of reason is, you know, it's like
Claude Rodin's thinker, you know, with his head on
his fist alone, solitary, thinking big, solitary thoughts, and
they turned around and said actually no. Reason itself
evolved sort of in opposition. So the way they
describe reasoning is just as you said, the business
of giving reasons. So Ricardo, you and I are
sitting in the savannah 30,000 years ago, and I
want to convince you to go to this particular
buffalo because I think we can take him down
and you're gonna take me to that buffalo. What
Mercier and Sperber said was that actually we start
with deep intuitions and then we start trying to
give reasons to justify those intuitions to someone else.
But the genius piece of the, the magic here
is that if I tell you we should go
and hunt that buffalo because he's got really pretty
eyes or because my girlfriend lives quite close, those
are terrible reasons for you to come hunt a
buffalo with me. So I have to come up
with objective reasons which you. Also might agree with
like that buffalo's slightly weaker or is a bit
slow or has just had a massive lunch. We're
more likely to catch him. So it's that that's
the way that Sperbert and Mercier think about the
evolution of reason as something which is done to
give reasons for your maybe your, your predispositions if
you want. And I think that's a hugely important
way of thinking about reasoning itself. But what I
don't wanna completely exclude because I think it would
be wrong to is the fact that we're also.
Again, we are good at reasoning. We can faced
with a problem, walk ourselves through, we're smart, we're
smart creatures. But where it came from is probably
to get somebody else to come and do what
we want. Yeah,
yeah, I agree, and I mean, I've also interviewed
Hugo Mercier. Dansberger and Hugo Mercier are two great
cognitive scientists, psychologists, and Yeah, their argumentative theory of
reasoning is really fascinating. So I mean, keeping that
in mind, do you think that the reasons people
tend to give for their opinions really matter as
much as we tend to believe, or do you
rather think that perhaps most Of the time what
we are actually doing is post hoc rationalization. I
mean that we already believe something or already hold
a particular opinion, and then only after the fact
do we come up with reasons to justify it
to other people, for example.
So, um. If we look at the spread of
things that we can have opinions about. Um, I
think there's a difference there insofar as, you know,
your opinions about, uh, how to lay a table
or my opinions about how to bring up my
kids, etc. THAT, that, that those may be, um,
those may be are in a sense slightly more
thought through, they're cultural, etc. BUT eventually we can
think our way out of them because they're not
that important to us. But our very, very deep
beliefs, which account are religiosity. Our deep ethical values,
our political tendencies, our political leanings, those come from
somewhere very, very deep inside us. And my experience
has been that since I've been working on this
book and thinking about these issues, um, I have
a very strong sense that from those, those deep
values, that the justifications we give for those deep
values are in many ways post hoc. They are
giving reasons for things that we deeply feel, for
deep intuitions which we're trying to find words for.
But, um, but it doesn't stop the fact that
that's we we profoundly think that we are reasoning
when we are having those arguments. You and I
were talking about Brexit just before you launched the
podcast because I happened to be in Portugal when
the Brexit vote happened 10 years ago. And um
and with Brexit, no question that the leavers felt
that they were making a fully rational and exclusively
rational argument about sovereignty in the UK and the
the need to get rid of European red tape
and taking back control of their borders. Those were
arguments that they felt they were making which were
reasonable. And the Remainers were making arguments which they
also felt were reasonable about security in the EU
being part of a bigger whole which would help
us to help defend ourselves against predatory larger powers
elsewhere. But, so those, those arguments were all reasonable,
but they came from somewhere very, very deep. And
therefore we have a self-conception as reasonable animals that
actually we may be visceral ones first.
So when it comes to the social aspects of
people's lives which play a role in influencing how
they form their opinions, which aspects have surprised you
the most when doing your research for this book?
Great question. Um, LET, I want to answer it
two ways. The first is I want to tell
you what the, the negative thing which surprised me,
which is that I think certainly I, but I
think a lot of us are convinced that psychology
plays a very important role in our opinions insofar
as all my life I've said, oh, she thinks
that because her mother never really loved her, or
he thinks that because his father was a bit
of a bully. All the data suggests those don't
have a huge impact. Insofar as the kind of
the psychological background to people's to the people's psychological
background doesn't influence their opinions that deeply it looks
like. So that was a major surprise to me.
A bit like the surprise that I think lots
of people, lots of people have found when looking
at sort of child rearing, which is that yeah
you can really screw up your kids. No question
you can screw up your kids, but they come
out pretty fully formed. They are not a tabula
raza. And so, and so that's, that was super
interesting for me and took some of the pressure
off me as a father wondering how much I'd
screwed up or how much I'd influenced my kids.
Turns out probably much less than I think. Um,
BUT in terms of things which surprised me positively,
I suppose it's, it's a very well known phenomenon
which is this, you're talking specifically about the social
element here, which is that, um, you know, we're
all now very used to the concept of contagion,
thank you, COVID. Um, BUT we talk about viral
ideas and, um, the spread and extent to which
ideas do go viral has, has fascinated me. And
so I suppose the book by, by, uh, by
Nick Christaris and John Fowler on contagion is fascinating
because it shows you that contagion isn't just a
question of ideas. Obesity is contagious, smoking is contagious,
happiness is contagious. So, um. Yeah, the, the power
of contagion when it comes to opinions and values,
I think is probably underrated.
Um, IN the book, you also go through several
different, uh, different aspects of our environment, and by
environment, I mean not necessarily in this case, the
social environment, but the natural environment around us influences,
uh, the development of our ideas or opinions. So,
could you give us an example of how a
climate can influence our opinions?
I, let me, let me give you 222 striking
ones. So. One of the interesting pieces of data
suggests that people in very hot and humid climates
tend to lean right. And not just right, they
tend to lean authoritarian right. So if you look
at a band across the equator, you'll see a
massive preponderance of uh a right leaning verging on
authoritarian regimes. And the, I suppose the great outlier,
the one which makes this point most clearly, is
Singapore. Singapore, which today, if you look at all
its sort of demographic, economic markers, it, it, it,
it sounds like a Scandinavian country. Um, IT'S got
very, very low child mortality, it's got, it's, I
think it's the, the, the best country in the
world to fulfill your true potential. Um, IT'S got
wonderful restaurants, it's pretty ecological despite being a small
island, etc. ETC. Um, AND yet at a political
level. The same family has been running Singapore since
independence. Lee Kuan Yew for 50 years or so,
then his son, and, um, and the interesting thing
there is that this is not an authoritarian state
in the sense that, you know, this is not
Stalin's Russia, Stalin's Soviet Union. This is an authoritarian
state with tremendous popular support. And um, and so
you, you, which seems weird to Westerners because we
always assume that kind of personal freedom. Um, AND
economic prosperity comes with the possibility of, you know,
sorry, the economic prosperity and economic freedom comes from
personal freedom. Turns out at a political level, not
the case. The reason that hot and humid climates
tend to favor right-wing authoritarian regimes or the people
from them tend to is because hot and humid
climates are particularly favorable to pathogens, bacteria, fungi, all
sorts of nasty things which carry infection. Hot and
humid is exactly what.
You, you're referring to the parasite stress theory of
political values,
right? Exactly, exactly, thank you, Ricardo. Um, AND so
the idea there with many of your listeners will
know, of course, is that in in in uh
highly contagious, infectious environments. Pretty normative social rules become
very important because you don't want people to cook
things differently or have relationships in ways which are
not being looked after because you can, the spread
of infection can go very fast. So one, you
end up with much more conservative values in those
kind of places, and two, you often look for
quite authoritarian leaders to enforce very. Difficult rules. So
there's a, so there's a, I'm making the connection
therefore between hot and humid and right wing authoritarian,
which we can see across the board, and that
is not, that's nothing to do with um anything
other than exactly parasite stress theory, pathogens in the
air. So that's one example of how climate influences
uh our politics. But uh climate also influences our
religion insofar as if you look at the, um,
there are, there are two kind of big groups
of God in the world historically. There are the
um the kind of the Greek and the Greco-Roman
version, give me, let me uh shortcut it, where
um the gods behave like abominably spoilt and quite
violent children for the most part, um, and they
have no real interest in the morality of humans
as long as you you sacrifice to them from
time to time or whatever it is, that they're
not bothered, nor are the, nor are they a
moral example to humans, right? And then you have,
and then you have what's called these moralizing high
gods, and the moralizing high gods are things like
the Jewish Yahweh or the Christian God or Muslim
Allah, um, that are profoundly prescriptive. The Quran is
read, is so, is so precise in its rules,
it's read like a legal text. And let's not
forget the 10 Commandments, those are commandments, they're not
suggestions, they're not like. Like nudges, their commandments. And
the theory goes that those, these monotheistic, not monotheistic,
moralizing religious religions emerge in places where there is
considerable ecological stress. Particularly drought, because drought is the
great climatic killer. And therefore the theory goes that
in areas where broadly everybody's OK, like Greece or
Rome or wherever it might be. Everybody's more or
less OK, you don't need to pull together that
much. You don't need very loud, dangerous, wrathful, angry,
prescribing gods, prescriptive gods, but you do in areas
where there are real ecological stresses.
Mhm. But of course that's one factor from our
natural environments that plays a role and of course
the way we form our opinions tends to be
multifactorial and not just unifactorial. So in the book
you also talk about, uh, geography. I mean, what
do you think are some of the most interesting
aspects of how geography can influence our opinions?
Um, The most important element of geography. Is how
it allows you to live. So, um, the, the,
the most important element of geography is in fact
geology. It's the soil beneath your feet. And, um,
so let me give you, let me tell you
a little story about the Vendee in France. So
the Vendee is just below the beautiful chateau of
the Loire, which was, you know, where all the
kings and dukes of France built their beautiful palaces,
and it's just above the very, very wealthy vineyards
of Bordeaux where you have the best wine in
the world. It's this area of. Historical, not poverty,
but, but not, not tremendous wealth, and it's also
to a, to a Frenchman, you mentioned the Vendee,
and it instantly triggers the thought of the most
terrible massacres of the, of the French Revolution. So
what happened during the French Revolution was that the
northern part of the Vendy stayed with the king
and they created an army which was called, I
think, Royalet Catholique. I mean they were really, they
hammered their colors to their mast and below the
south of the Vendy. There was a huge peasant
uprising, which in fact, Won, won horribly, um, and
was joined by the Revolutionary Guards from the rest
of France and destroyed the whole of the north
of the Vendee killing potentially up to 200,000 people.
I mean, a, a monstrous massacre. But one of
the reasons, one of the reasons that's the case,
why was there this great split between the north
and the south of the Vendet when it came
to the revolution? And um. A great political geographer
called Andrei Siegfried in the, in the early 20th
century thought that he came up with the answer,
which was the difference between limestone. And granite The
north is granite. The geology of the north is
granite, which means you have excellent runoff. Um, AND
you're, it, it's propitious to building very large estates.
So what ended up happening is one landlord got
rich and then bought the field of the next
one and got bigger and bigger, so the whole
of the North on the basis of the granite
beneath it was able to turn into these very
large estates and these landlords became gentry and these
gentry became aristocrats, um, and completely changed the, the
geographical makeup of that area because there were no
little towns. All the little towns were essentially just
next to the chateau of the Lord. Who paid
the priest, who paid the school teacher. And all
the peasants were sort of scattered around these large
lands, would only come over on the Sunday, would
never meet each other. They'd be working wherever they
were and come on the Sunday and meet each
other, but were fed the propaganda, if you want,
of the Lord. In the South, it's limestone, which
meant that the, the, it gets, it gets boggy,
um, it's, it's not at all favorable to large
scale agriculture, so the people that lived there lived
in smallish communities, quite communitarian groups. That manage themselves
broadly independent from everybody else. So they're the ones
who turned into the revolutionary peasants of the uh
of the French Revolution and the ones in the
north were the ones who were the kind of
rear rearguard action. So there's lots of examples of
that and another, and one of the something which
will be I'm sure very familiar to your readers
is the um is the rice thesis of uh
of culture. So, um, just to, just to
so comparing agricultural societies which were primarily based on.
Rice cultivation versus wheat, for example, right,
precisely, and, and, and you can,
you can even do that in different regions of
China, I think,
and in tiny regions of Turkey. I mean there
are, there are, it makes a massive difference and
the idea here is that um that, that this
kind of fundamental difference that we have across the
world, this axis that we place all societies on
from individualistic Anglo-Saxon to collectivist, Chinese, um, which all
societies sit on. Is dependent on this great difference
of agriculture, so to, to, to, to farm wheat,
you can do it as a family, as a
single family. To farm rice, it doesn't take one
village, it takes networks of villages to build the
paddies, maintain the irrigation systems, etc. ETC. So one
is gonna be able to, is gonna build a
culture of self-reliance because they have to. And the
other is gonna build a culture based around reciprocity,
mutuality. Relationship harmony because it has to.
So rice-based cultures would be, would tend to be
more collectivistic and wheat-based cultures would tend to be
more individualistic or at least go in that, more
in that direction,
right? Exactly, exactly, yeah, so our deepest beliefs are
often the result of the muck beneath our feet.
Sure, yeah, right. So, I mean, another very interesting
aspect that you, uh, explore in your book has
to do with, uh, our own body anatomy, body
composition, uh, different kinds of physical traits. And how
they might influence our opinions. So, uh, and I
would like to ask you a very specific question
here. So, uh, why is it that conventionally attractive
people tend to prefer the free market?
It, it's a thank you very much for asking
that question. It's a fascinating piece of data. Um,
YEAH, conventionally attractive people tend to tend to lean
conservative. Now there are obviously lots of very attractive
people who all of Hollywood, which leans left, um,
and, and of course everything he can do that
you and I are speaking. About, about today, um,
is, is obviously, I'm talking about averages, I'm talking
about generalities, and to your point, all the influences
on our opinions and beliefs are layered, so there
is no absolute at any point. But, um, but
on average, conventionally attractive people tend to lean right
for a specific reason, which is, um. Beautiful people,
beautiful babies get more eye time from their parents
than their less attractive siblings. Teachers spend more time
with attractive students. They believe in them more because
of this thing called the halo effect where if
you have a quality in one thing, people assume
you have lots of other qualities as well. They
think that because they're attractive, they're also hard workers
and more intelligent and have got, have got prospects,
so teachers spend more time with them. Bosses give
them pay rises. There is a, in the US
at least, there's a 10 to 15% plainness penalty
on salaries. So there is, so essentially attractive people
have lived life on the game of life on
level easy. Um, PUSHED by everybody from their parents
to their teachers, to their bosses, etc. ETC. Everybody
wants a piece of them, um, and they are
trusted, believed in, etc. So they've gone through the
game of life on level easy, and it figures,
they tend to do quite well at it, relatively.
And so what that does to them when they
see somebody who's not doing so well in life
is to say, well, hang on, I did it.
I did it, it went pretty easy for me.
So if they're not doing it, it's because they're
lazy or they're not working hard enough or they're.
Stupid or something else, they don't really deserve it,
and so what the, the, the very specific piece
of conservatism that attractive people lean towards is meritocracy.
That old idea that you get what you deserve
and you deserve what you get. Because they have
never seen, they've never felt the downsides of inequality,
they've never experienced it. In fact, it's worked the
other way around for them. They've, they've been accelerated
through, through life. They, and they of course therefore
think that. Merit is, should be the functioning principle
on which we do everything, not knowing that most
of their merit comes from just having symmetrical faces.
Yeah, so I mean it's basically people who are
more conventionally attractive. Other people tend to have certain
positive assumptions about them and so they tend to
be favored relative to other less conventionally attractive people
and so they are put in a basically privileged
position and so they tend to favor the status
quo,
right. Exactly, and believe in the prospect of improving
yourself because they've been able to.
Yeah. OK, so I, I want to ask you
this, this is sort of funny, but it's also
fascinating. What, what does peanut butter have to do
with politics?
Um, YES, this is the only important question, you
can go. Um,
uh, YEAH, this one and the pineapple on pizza
one.
OK, we can come back to that as well,
but I think, I think they have the same
answer. Um, CAN I give a tiny little bit
of background around this insofar as this book emerges
out of a, um, a monstrous failure on my
part, which is that in 2020, 2021, I tried
to build an encyclopedia of all opinions. I tried
to build a Wikipedia of all arguments. It was
a mad 18th century project which we raised some
money for, we built it out, um, and Ricardo,
I can't tell you how many people did not
come to my website. It was a, it was
an abject failure. Um, BUT we started working with
it. We started changing it, tweaking it and doing
a bunch of things to it, and, and nothing
happened. I was trying to build a movement of
people who were trying to map all, trying to
build the footnotes of the internet really is what
I was trying to do. And we tried to
build this movement, it didn't work. And at a
certain point, there's one of the many experiments that
I did, we put a vote button on these
opinions. And we asked people a little bit about
themselves first, so, you know, male, female, non-binary, uh,
where are you from, how much money do you
make? Do you have kids? Are you married? Are
you gay, straight, fluid? It's, what are your politics,
a whole bunch of different things. And so people
started voting, and within the 1st 6 months we
got a million votes on this thing. So I
realized, OK, people don't wanna argue, but they do
want to tell you what they think. But I
mean I had quite a bunch of interesting data.
And um so I would surf around this site
with, you know, a couple of 1000 opinions on
it and go and see well who'd voted on
what and what do they think. Anyway, it, it
was a wiki, which means anybody could upload their
opinions and then have them vote on them, and
one of the opinions was I prefer smooth peanut
butter. And I was like, OK, well, I don't
know what I was doing that evening, it must
have been late. I was like, I'll just go
and check how people voted on this. And there's
almost no difference between the generations. The generations broadly,
most of them slightly prefer smooth peanut butter to,
to crunchy. There's no difference between the genders. Um,
ALTHOUGH I remember non-binary people have very strong views,
it's very radicalizing, so all non-binary people either prefer
peanut butter, smooth, or peanut butter, crunchy, but nobody
doesn't have a view. Anyway, this is details which
are completely irrelevant. But then I went to look
at the politics, and the politics of peanut butter
are mad insofar as something like, if I remember
off the top of my head, 48% of hard
left wingers prefer peanut butter crunchy versus 16% of
hard conservatives. And I looked at this and I
thought. You know, I, it's, I realized I didn't
understand anything anymore. It's like none of my world
makes sense. I gotta start from scratch. Um, WHERE
does it, where does this come from? So I
went in, I went in deep dive. I did
a massive deep dive on this. And, um. And
I also remember looking at all the other foods,
food, there are a bunch of foods, food opinions
on the site, including one which was like, I
prefer hamburgers to curry. Again, right wing, 3 times
more than left wing on hamburgers to curry. So
I was like, OK, there's a thing here, what
is it? Anyway, I went digging in and I'm
sure some of, many of your listeners will, will
know this, but um I went digging in and
it turns out that. You know, maybe some right
wingers prefer hamburger to curry because they support the
meat industry or because maybe they're a bit jingoistic
and they wanna eat home rather than eat for,
I mean, hell knows. But it also turns out
that on average, conservatives have got a very slightly
higher papillary density on their tongue than liberals. They
literally have more taste buds. Mhm. Um, AND that
blew my mind. It blew my mind, but it
turns out that it's part of a much bigger
thing, which is that there is in fact what's
called the kind of the conservative neurological complex, which
is that, um, conservatives, for example, are, have slightly
more taste buds on their tongue. They react in
a slightly more extreme way to loud noises. So
if you, if you hook them up to an
electrometer, um, you, you, you see how much they
sweat when they're surprised and they sweat slightly more
than liberals do. Um, THEY, um. They're much, they're
much more disgusted by other people's body odor. I
mean, we're all disgusted by other people's body odor,
but Conservatives are more disgusted by other people's body
odor. And this ties up to um to something
which is, which is around disgust. It turns out
that Conservatives experience slightly higher levels of disgust than
liberals. Their neurology is wired to be more attentive
to things which. Cause threat and the disgust response
of course is a threat response. So when we're
disgusted, we do that funny face, we kind of
do, we kind of do that, you know, we,
and what we're doing is we're we're kind of
closing up our eyes, so that nothing comes in.
We're closing up our nose, our nostrils by kind
of wrinkling it and we're blocking our palate, so
our tongue goes to the back, so literally it's
a threat response. And um so anyway, this sent
me down the most extraordinary rabbit hole because the
conservative neurological complex you can see obviously in the
brain and um. And that I think is the
mind blower because what it tells you, what you
told me is that in fact, Conservative and liberal.
This kind of universal axis which really does exist
around all all over the world, a kind of
a left and a kind of a right, defined
in slightly different ways, but broadly left and right
exists all over the world. Are slightly slightly differently
wired, um, and conservatives tend to be wired with,
for example, their amygdala, these sort of part of,
part of the, part, part of the uh limbic
system, which are these two little almond shaped things
at the top of the, behind our eyes, etc.
WHICH process emotion and process danger, process fear, tend
to be slightly more active and slightly larger than
liberals. So they just have, they have brains and
bodies which are more attendant to threat. And um
Andrebus have obviously the opposite, slightly less attentive than
threat, they have their own peculiarities. But um it
was an extraordinary way into discovering that in fact
um we are, we're not from Mars and from
Venus, but we are, we're, we're we're we're different
clusters. There are different kind of political phenotypes at
either end of the spectrum which you can actually
measure.
But this sort of neurobiological basis to political ideologies,
political beliefs, do we know? Whether they have a
genetic basis to them and if so, um, I
mean, how, how much of them is influenced by
genetics or if it's, uh, I don't know if
they are more influenced by environmental factors that people
are exposed through, uh, are exposed to through development
or, I mean, what do you, do we know
about that?
So, so in this specific instance obviously of um
of more active amygdala or in the case of
liberals, slightly more active anterior cingulate cortex, um, that,
that's biological, that's genetic. Um, AND there are all
sorts of really interesting theories now as to how
we might have evolved these two broad clusters of
left of left and right genetically. Um, THE father
of biopolitics, which is this discipline, is a man
called John Hibbing, who teaches at the University of
Nebraska. And, um. And he, he believes that in
fact we all start kind of liberal, but that
there have been moments, long moments in history which
have, um, to which a conservative approach became adaptive.
So, um, but anyway, that's a, that's a long
and complicated, um, conversation which we don't really have
answers yet to. But to come back to your
key question, how much of our politics is genetic
and how much of it is environmental? Thank God
for twins because all the work has been done
on twins, identical twins and fraternal twins, and obviously
you compare the similarity of one and the other,
given that everything else is pretty much alike. You
can discount differences if you're comparing fraternal twins and
identical twins. Um, WHAT'S fascinating there is that we
now think that upwards of upwards of 50% of
our core political identity, our core political views are
in fact genetic. And, um, these have been studies
which have been done from the 1990s onwards. They've
been done with massive studies of identical twins and
fraternal twins. They've been done with very large studies
of identical twins reared apart. So you have, don't
have the same environmental influences on, on, on them.
And um we've got data which I show in
my book across dozens of different categories, so you
know, your your, your views on pornography, Ricardo, are
they environmental or are they or are they genetic?
It turns out they're probably just under 50% genetic.
So. Just a little bit more environmental, but your
views on pacifism, your views, your views on race,
your views on tax. I mean, a whole bunch
of different things. So it turns out genetics play
a really important role in our political makeup, potentially
also in our religiosity. Mhm. Not as large, but
there's still some, there's still, there's still data that
shows that's the case. Um, SO yeah, when I,
when I said at the beginning of this podcast
that our parents didn't have much of an influence
on our opinions. Environmentally, that's true. They have a
massive impact on our opinions biologically.
Yeah, but I, I mean, 50% or up to
50%, it's still not as if the environment doesn't
play a big role as well, right? And I
mean, even the, that idea that unfortunately some people
still hold on to a genetic determinism, I mean,
that's pretty much outdated by now.
Yeah, exactly. My favorite, my favorite line, um, is
by a guy called uh Schreiber. Darren Shchreiber, whose,
whose line was, humans are hardwired not to be
hardwired insofar as we live in, we live in
a really complicated place and we've been spectacularly successful
at thriving and adapting in all elements of it.
We live in the Kalahari, we live in the
Arctic Circle, we live in tiny little communities, we
live in megalopolises, no, I can't even pronounce that
word, with millions of inhabitants. Um, WE, the world
is too complex a place for us to have
predetermined responses to it of that kind. Which is
why consciousness, which is why, um, which is why
it's some element of intellectual agency and, um, and
certainly the environment plays in absolutely to that. But,
um, what it does, I, the reason, so I'm,
I'm very much not, nor do, nor do I
think anybody serious believes in kind of pre predetermined
thoughts in that way. That's not true. Some serious
people really do believe in predetermined ideas, the lack
of intellectual agency, but I'm not there. Where I,
where I land is on this idea of, of
um predisposition. So we have. Strong predispositions, in some
instances, very strong predispositions if our very bodies refuse
us to allow, refuse us to see the world
like other people see the world because my brain
is a different shape to yours. Um, WE literally
can't see eye to eye because I will never
see through your perspective. So those are very strong
predispositions, but they're predispositions. Mhm. They're not predetermined.
So why is it that we care so much,
or at least to a certain extent, and to,
and we tend, of course, at least sometimes to
be selective in the way that we do it,
but why do we care so much about telling
other people about our own opinions? Why is it
that we tend to care so much about other
people's opinions? I mean, more broadly, what are the
social functions of our opinions?
Great question. Um, THERE are many social functions, and
I think, um. The, the The way that I
shifted this in my mind was to realize that
a lot of our opinions are much more important
for what they do than for what they say.
Insofar as we do an enormous amount of social
work. With our views. The, the, the, the easiest
way of describing this is that um Ricardo, if
you and I are part of the same village
a long time ago and everybody in the village
believes that God is a very big black rock
at the end of your field. And I believe
that God is er a man with a beard
on a cloud. I'm in deep, deep, deep trouble.
I'll be excluded from our village. I'm potentially excluded
from the safety of the village, I'm potentially excluded
from, from reproduction, from being able to have, have
mates, being able to eat, etc. ETC. So, so
in that instance, it makes much more sense for
me to believe with you in the rock than
it is to come up with my own ideas.
And um And one of the reasons that I,
that I would do that is because whether I
believe in the rock or a man with a
beard on a cloud really doesn't make any difference
at all. So, but in that instance it's, it's
kind of, it makes the point quite clearly that
that our kind of, uh, we declare beliefs to
prove that we're part of something. And, um, if
you'll excuse me for getting political for one second,
um, it's been fascinating to watch the speed with
which pretty much every Republican legislator came to, uh,
maybe not accept. But to declare the lie about
the stolen election in 2020. The guy that Trump
paid to go and investigate the election and tell
him that it was faulty told him that it
wasn't. I mean, there is no question that Biden
won. But over the course of not very long
at all, there's kind of this movement to support
the Trump narrative um took hold and then spread
like wildfire. Almost nobody doesn't declare this. And on
some level you could say, well, it's venal and
frightened and cowardly and whatever it might be. There's
possibly an element of that. But actually, if you're
thinking of it rationally, then it's easy to attack,
but if you're thinking of it socially. It's much
less easy to attack because actually what these people
are doing is they are shoring up their political
party. They're shoring up their own identity. They're giving
themselves a place to be. And actually by declaring,
it's almost like by declaring a false belief and
saying that it's yours, it's a demonstration of extraordinary
loyalty, right? You, it's a, it's a, it's a
sacrifice of your intellectual integrity, which is a huge
sacrifice. And um and so I think it plays
a so all to say I think that that
that we we we hold beliefs that do things
for us for lots of different reasons. We hold
beliefs to compete, right? I wanna be more radical
leftist than Yiko, so I'm gonna come up with
something. You, when, yeah, I remember this when everybody
was canceling everybody and in the UK, um, uh,
we were, we, we canceled slave traders, we canceled,
I can't remember what else we canceled, and at
a certain point, the really cool thing to do
was to cancel Churchill. Because Churchill was responsible for
a tremendous famine in in India during the Second
World War. But that was the, the caste market,
like you were a proper radical if you were
canceling Churchill in public on Twitter. So we compete
via ideas. Um, WE demonstrate that we belong via
ideas by accepting the kind of collective truths. But,
um, because I think, I think it's the um,
it's the old line, you know, people prefer to
be wrong together than right alone. And at a,
as I said before, at a rational level that's
dumb. But at an evolutionary level, it's obviously the
right call. And so that instinct is very strong
for us.
And I mean this has a lot to do
with deciding who we should trust because we have
to coordinate our behaviors and to, and I mean
and to do that we need to know or
to know as best we can who we can
trust and who we can't trust,
right. Yeah, no, absolutely. Um, SO we're trying to,
we're trying to build, we're always in the process
of trying to build alliances cos human beings are
profoundly social and we cannot exist alone. Um, EVEN
the wheat farmers sometimes have to talk to other
people. But, um, but yes, so this question of,
of, of learning who, who to, who to trust
is, is obviously fundamental, and it takes us back
nicely to, um, Hugo Mercier and Dan Berber. Because
um when they started, when they developed their theory
of kind of, of uh argumentative reasoning, which is
that we essentially reasoning is the business of giving
reasons for some for something, um, what, what their
line is, is that if I'm trying to convince
you of something. Yeah. Your confirmation bias, this thing
which everybody attacks us for, right, you know, ever,
ever, ever since Danny Kahneman and, you know, Fast
and slow, uh, we've all been sitting there going,
oh, I have all these terrible cognitive biases and
the worst is confirmation bias cos it means I
cannot get myself out of my preconceptions. I refuse
to listen to information or data or evidence which
will contradict my ideas. And what Spurborough and Mercier
say is that that's really helpful, spectacularly helpful, because
my confirmation bias, if you're trying to convince me
of something you can't do, and I'm pushing back
and pushing back and pushing back because I don't
want to accept what you're telling me, even if
the evidence is great. It forces you to come
up with better and better reasons to convince me.
And so the way that Mercier and Spurber think
of this. Is that they think of my confirmation
bias, refusing to believe you as a kind of
epistemic um protection, defense mechanism. I'm trying to make,
I'm trying to make sure that I can trust
you and the only way I can trust you
is if you are able to convince me of
ideas in such a way that they're as valuable
for me as they are for you. And that's
called logic, that's reasoning. Mhm
But I mean, I know that this is something
that happens more often and is more visible or
more expressive when we live in conditions of political,
social, or economic instability, but why is it that
we tend to be So vicious not only toward
people who present themselves as part of our political
opposition, but also to people that even though they're
part of our own political tribe, they manifest ideas
we disagree with.
So I'm not going to talk to the psychological
element, but let's touch on it super quickly, which
is that I think. Our, our opinions feel very
much like extensions of ourselves, and we think of
them as um representations of ourselves. So when they're
attacked, it's like we're being, we're being personally attacked.
Um AND. We might say that was silly, but
actually it's even more true than we might realize
insofar as these ideas that we think are reasoned
are also in fact, as we were saying earlier,
very, very visceral. They come out of very deep
parts of ourselves, so they are deep extensions of
who we are. But the fundamental, the fundamental, um,
problem I think, and it's in a sense maybe
the, the point of my book is, is that.
We argue as voraciously and as furiously with people
we disagree with. Actually, because we think of them
as the same as us. So, um, I, it,
I, it still takes, I still have to think
twice to accept that people who are pro gun
rights in the US, um, have not all been
bought off by the NRA. In my, deep in
my heart I'm like, no, that, that's not a
rational, that's not a rational, um, political position. I
just can't believe it. There's gotta be something else
behind this. I, I've now, I've, I've educated myself.
I really do understand that it's a very deeply
held and. Quite honorable position in its own way,
um, but you know what I mean, when you
meet somebody who you're arguing with on a topic
that you know well, and where you've done the
work and they disagree with you, you look at
them and you go, oh hang on, I've read
everything. I've done the work, these are my conclusions.
If they disagree with me, it's because. They're either
intellectually corrupt or they're lazy, or they're lying, or
they're morally corrupt, or they've been bought. But they're
they're, we see people who disagree with us as
a broken version of ourselves. And. And therefore we,
it's impossible for us to engage with the sincerity
of the other side. Which is why we end
up with these violent fights, cos we're both sides
are convinced the other one is trying to pull
the wool over their eyes. They're lying, they're hiding
something, they've got an interest which they're not declaring.
Whereas when you realize that the other side, because
they've got whatever, they've come from a very different
part of the world, or the front of their
brain is more developed than the back of their
brain, or their tongues have got more taste buds
on them, I mean, these entirely random, accidental, arbitrary
things, but which, which genuinely change the fundamental perspective
of the other person. When you see them as
different from you, you're forced to engage with their
sincerity because their difference is as arbitrary as yours
is. And I think that's what creates the basis
for a real conversation. You stop thinking of the
other person as broken, you start thinking of them
as different.
But, but when it comes to this agreement, is
it really all about conflict, or is there more
to it than simply conflict?
In terms of argument. Yes. Yeah. So, um One
of the things that We all hope for is
that um well let me put this a different
way. Argument as conflict is fantastic if it's aimed
in the right direction. But it needs to be
aimed in the right direction. So there's a beautiful
book by a guy called Ian Leslie in the
UK which came out in the US as well
called Conflicted, and, and he's got a nice line,
he says conflict is information. And he's right, and
he's got lots of interesting data about the fact
that, you know, couples that argue, stay together tend
to stay together longer. Children who argue with their
parents and parents who argue back with their parents
tend to have a more open and, and, and
healthier relationship. But um, so one conflict broadly, good
thing, but conflict has to be managed in a
specific way. And um and I think this is
the thing which is so tricky, which is that
if you and I have a problem in front
of us that both of us have identified we
need to fix and we come at it from
different perspectives, we're nevertheless sort of shoulder to shoulder
in the way that we're attacking this thing. And
that shoulder to shoulder argument, when we're going in
the same direction, we can be screaming at each
other as we go, but that, that we have
a shared objective. And when you have a shared
objective in, in argument, then. And as long as
nobody brings sticks and people don't insult each other,
then, um, then actually that conflict in argument is
almost certainly the most efficient way, the most beautiful
way of thinking, the most effective way of thinking.
Um, BUT, um, but when you don't have that
sense of aiming in the right, in the same
direction, then you quite quickly turn into a zero-sum
game. And I think one of the things which
has been tricky for us over the course of
the last what, 1015 years or so across the
West has been this sense that the common project
of democracy. Um, WHERE, you know, you have this
idea in, in the British Parliament of the loyal
opposition, right? Um, THE loyal opposition is loyal, not
to you. But to the business of parliament, to
democracy, to the running of the country, they're loyal
to the king or queen. They're loyal to the
country. That idea that the opposition is in somehow
way loyal to you, I think is super important
and it's exactly what's starting to fray now, both
particularly in the US but in lots of, lots
of countries where we, as we radicalize and polarize.
And I think that's a terrible pity because to
go back to the argument, the argument idea. There's
so much data that suggests that actually we think
best when we're arguing. I use the example of
uh Francis Crick and James Watson, who discovered the
double helix nature of uh DNA in 1953 at
Cambridge. Um, YOU know, if you read James Watson's
book. You, you expect, you know, a careful unpicking
of the various different laboratory discoveries that they made,
etc. It, it, it reads like, like a bust
up. I mean, it reads like a, like a
western movie. They're screaming at each other all the
time. It's like this extraordinary chemical reaction of two
very different people. You know, Francis Crick was a
35-year-old Brit who um. Who'd studied chemistry and physics
before biology, who was a very serious introvert, didn't
like people. James Watson was a super ambitious American
23 year old who'd studied ornithology and viruses. I
mean, so very different perspectives, very different characters, very
different areas of expertise who came together in, in
this kind of explosion of thought, um, and were
able to. Decode DNA in part, perhaps exclusively because
they loved talking so much. So you know, in
the, in the, in the, in the conflict of
different ideas, great, great things happen, but you need
to be facing in the same direction.
OK, but let me just say that when it
comes to Watson and Crick, of course they have
their merit, but we should give a lot more
merit to Rosalind Franklin and her students because, I
mean, of course, of course, at the end of
the day it was Watson and Crick who discovered
the structure of DNA, but the pictures that Them
to do so were actually originally from Franklin and
her students. I mean, for all intents and purposes
they were stolen by Watson and Crick. So I
mean
just to be fair. You're right, no, no, really
important footnote, but there's a detail there which is
super important as well. I've forgotten her collaborator, but,
but Franklin was working with someone else in London.
And um one of the arguments made is that
they were not able to come up with that
last step of Crick and Watson, in part because
there was no conversation. Because she was a woman,
she was excluded from the kind of the mess
of uh what was it Imperial, I can't remember
the Imperial or University College London anyway, so she
was kind of, she was really working all by
herself. Miracle that she was able to achieve what
she did, but actually the, the advantage that Crick
and Watson had was that there were two of
them talking and she was basically by herself.
Yeah, yeah, I agree. So, um, let me ask
you another thing now, and I mean, I, I
know that this question is going to probably bother
some people out there, particularly the philosophers, but all
of the things that we've been talking about here
today, I mean, the social aspects, the psychological aspects,
the aspects of our psychology that might more genetic
in basis in their base or might be more
permeable to environmental influences, all of that. I mean,
do you think that that also plays a role
in how philosophers themselves come up with their ideas?
I mean, because we have to be honest, they're
humans as all of us are,
right? Yeah, it can, I mean, I, the idea
that philosophers somehow are made of a different material
to the rest of us is, I mean. Um,
SOME of them feel like that when you talk
to them, but, um, but no, they're all, we're
all human. We're all human, and so, um, while
I'm not sure a lot of philosophers have had
their brains scanned, um, or their psychological histories played
out, um, they're obviously human and therefore they are
subject to exactly the same inferences as the rest
of us, and they will have profound influence on
the ways in which they think and thought and
the ways in which they articulated their views of
the world, no question. So one. The answer to
your question is absolutely, philosophers are humans too. Maybe
that's a hashtag we need. Um, BUT the, the,
the, the extension of that of course is, you
know, grist to my mill insofar as where professional
thinkers are able to take reason, are able to
take their minds is also such spectacular demonstrable proof
that humans are not predetermined in their ideas. That
we have very deep predispositions to things. But actually
the, the places that we can take ourselves by,
by force of reason is, is extraordinary. It's the
great, one of the great pleasures in life. Um,
AND of course philosophers are the great exemplars of
that. So yeah, they, they, they, they're, they're, they're
actually a, a, a very nice little model for
us to remind ourselves of both, you know, the
deep biological, genetic, cultural, geological influences on our star,
on our, on our, on our, on our perspectives.
Entirely arbitrary, entirely random, over which we have no
control whatsoever. And the fact that there is intellectual
agency which does very beautiful things.
Yeah, I mean, the way I look at things,
and please let me know if you agree with
this, is that I mean many times people, academics,
philosophers, and also scientists get very bothered whenever someone
suggests that perhaps some of their ideas might not
really stem from the fact that they are really
pursuing objective truth or that they are completely impartial
and it's Just about reason and empirical data and
all of that. It's also many times about where
their some of their strong intuitions stem from and
perhaps sometimes there's even a little bit of post
hoc rationalization and then, uh, I mean, because they
are working within the collective, of course they argue
with each other and I guess that at least
to some extent we could apply Mercyer. And perverse
theory here and then I mean little by little
they get closer and closer to the truth. So
I mean it's not really that bad that people
are operating with all of these imperfect cognition and
biases. I mean that's actually how humans work, but
at the end of the day, philosophy, science, and
other disciplines. Still work because we are er er
people are imbued within collectives,
right, precisely, um, and you know one, we've gotta
love it cos we can't escape it. Um, AND
2, it talks again to something very important to
me, which is that if we have these very
deep predispositions. They are in a sense a kind
of a cage, right? We are bounded by our
strange minds and our strange histories and the fact
that we happen to be born where we were
born and to the people that we were born
to, etc. We are bound. We do not have
God's mind. And therefore, what's the key out of
this cage? The only key out of this cage
is, is conversation. The only key out of this
cage is to go off and smash yourself against
people who disagree with you. Um, IT'S to go
and sort of seek out intellectual discomfort, it's to
go and get stuck into the arguments where perspectives
which are not your own, somebody is gonna try
their best to force them upon you and your
confirmation bias will reject them. And in that kind
of dance of, you know, it's like a tango,
two steps forward, one step back, as both of
you try and do it to each other, this
magical sort of alchemical reaction occurs, which I, I,
I think is what's called reasoning. And it's not
just, it's not just beautiful insofar as it creates
the possibility for of, of, of reason, but it
also on some profound human level, um, I hope,
gives us the opportunity to. Sort of escape ourselves,
it to kind of take independence from our own
minds on some level, which is why the pleasure
of reading, the pleasure of talking, and I don't
know, I don't know whether you have this, but
I mean you cos you. You do conversations professionally
to capital, but we've, we all have this experience,
you know, in conversation. There are certain great conversations
where when you catch your mind at work in
conversation with someone else, it almost does feel independent,
it, there are certain conversations which take you way
beyond where you could have started yourself. And it's
not just because you're talking to somebody who's cleverer
than you, because you're doing the same thing to
them. So there is this, there is this kind
of magic that happens in conversation where you, where
you kind of leave yourself. And um and are
able to see the world in ways that you
would never have been able to do all alone,
and that I think is. You know, there's the
upside of reasoning itself, which is good for society,
and then there's the upside of reasoning at a
personal level, which is that it expands who you
are.
Yeah, uh, I mean, uh, I have one last
question. Uh, EARLIER we talked a little bit about,
uh, I mean, throughout our conversation, actually, we mentioned,
um, when, for example, we talked about climate, how
climate influences people's opinions and how people who live
in, uh, hotter and more humid climates tend to,
uh, have more, tend to lean more right. And
authoritarian than people who live in colder and less
humid environments, for example, and we talked about, um,
I mean, basically how we tend to have a
tribal approach to disagreement and to other people's opinions.
I mean, do you, uh, when it comes to
politics, do you think that, uh, and particularly in
More unstable conditions like for example, we find ourselves
in nowadays across many countries out there unfortunately and
where there's apparently increased radicalization and polarization in politics,
uh, in what ways do you think we should
try to approach potential solutions to those kinds of
issues?
Tiny question to finish. Thank you, Ricardo. I mean,
maybe, maybe let me start with, with um, with
a proviso which is that I really love radicalization.
I, I want as many weird ideas out there
as possible and, and there's a very strong argument
that the reason that we find ourselves at a
moment of political radicalization now is because the systems
that we've set up for the last few decades.
Didn't work or did work but worked for very
few people or worked for a bit and now
no longer works, so we, it does feel like
we are certainly in Western Europe and and and
in the US but more broadly too, we're in
a moment when we're like, we're asking, we're asking
questions of our political thinkers and we're asking questions
of our leaders in a way which is much
more radical than was the case when everybody was
essentially Tony Blair or Gerhard Schroeder or Bill Clinton.
That those those those their time is gone and
so we we do want radical ideas because it's
not all working for everybody now. So, um, the,
the clash of ideas is, as we were just
saying, is fantastic. That's exactly how we progress and
that's how we come up with new and exciting
things to build and. Social institutions to invent and
new different social settlements to try, etc. The problem
is, is the feeling. The problem is, well, let
me give you this data point, which is that
um in the 1950s and 19690s, if you asked
an American family whether they were OK with their
son or daughter bringing back a member of the
other political party, like you're a Democrat family, your
daughter's bringing back a Republican boyfriend, you ask the
family if that was OK, they were like 3%
said they would bother them. They didn't, they, they
had problems with race and they had problems with
religion. So it wasn't all joyful then, but they
didn't have problems with politics. Now you ask a
Republican or a Republican or a Democrat whether they'd
be OK with, you know, their darling daughter or
darling son bringing back somebody from the other team,
and it's like 50% would say they would be
really outraged. So there's been an what's called an
affective polarization. Not a polarization of ideas, but a
polarization of feeling about the other side. And that's
terrible. That's terrible because at a certain point when
you think the other side is not your loyal
opposition, but your enemy. Then you end up in,
we were talking about it, a zero-sum game where
if they win, you lose, and, and, and you're
so frightened by what they're gonna do to democracy
or they're gonna do to the state that it's
better for you to break democracy. Than it is
for you to let them take over. So you
end up with a, in a, in a, in
a horrible, quite urgent situation which it sort of
feels like we're, we're dancing around. I don't have
an answer here, but the one answer that feels
emotionally right to me is precisely this thing of
realizing that we are in a, we're in a,
uh, dance with the other side. That we are,
we evolved. This difference amongst us is evolved. Because
it was adaptive at certain periods, and we've got
to assume that it's still adaptive, there are no
societies in which there are no right wingers or
no left wingers. We need the other side because
they are helpful to us because sometimes their responses
are more adaptive to the current, the circumstances that
we find ourselves in. But we also need them
because we need all instincts across society. We need
the kind of the caring, um, progressive, innovative instincts
of the left, and we need the, um, the
proud, protecting, strong influences of the right at, at
the same time, you know. And, and so I
think once we realize that we've got this kind
of this great spread. Um, THAT society couldn't function
without male and female and turns out society couldn't
function without right and left, then we're able to
build a larger, a larger self-conception. It's no longer
about me and my version of the US or
the UK or Portugal and everybody else being evil.
It's, um, this is what Portugal or the UK
or the US is. Um, IT takes all of
us to run it together and therefore we're facing
in the same direction when we argue. But that's
what's missing.
OK, so look, I, I just want to tell
you that, uh, I mean, all, many of the
things we have explored there and we even talked
about peanut butter and all of that, and there
are other funny examples that you bring up in
your book. Uh, I mean, framing it as a
matter of opinion, that's all fine and dandy, but
there's one very specific uh debate that you framed
as A matter of opinion in your book that
I think it's just absolutely preposterous that you framed
it as such, that is the debate as to
who is the better football player, Cristiano Ronaldo or
Lionel Messi, and I mean, I'm, I'm, I'm saying
this as a Portuguese person. Lionel Messi is clearly.
Without a shadow of a doubt, better than Cristiano
Ronaldo. I mean, if you want, I can bring
you a goal, goal contributions per match, uh, goals
per match. I can bring you free kicks, I
can bring you dribbling abilities, I can bring you,
uh, uh, progressive movements, key, key passes, goals and
assists for finals, and. Anything you want.
I mean,
Lionel Lionel Messi is clearly a better football player.
OK, well, so, so Ricardo, I, I mean, one,
I have to take what you're saying very seriously
because as a Portuguese person you're obviously going against
your cultural conditioning here. But if you, um, but
I'm also gonna, you're reinforcing my point because it
turns out that one of the great political dividers.
One of the great scissor questions when you wanna
know people's politics is who do you prefer? There
is a people who tend liberal. All prefer Lionel
Messi. People who tend conservative, all favor Cristiano Ronaldo,
so you're just telling me about your deepest predispositions,
you're coming to me with goals per match, advances,
layups, whatever all the other things are, but actually
it's your heart talking, or maybe your brain. OK,
OK,
no, that, that, that's fair. That's fair. And actually
in terms of the peanut butter thing, I also,
it also tells away the fact that I'm a
left wing, so. Uh, SO, uh, OK, so great.
The book, the book is again Why We Think
What We Think, The Unexpected Origins of Our Deepest
Beliefs. Yeah, there's the cover, really nice. So, uh,
and I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm of course leaving a
link with in the description of the interview and
Tri, uh, would you like to just let people
know where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
With, with great pleasure, yeah, they'll find me at
at Tri Munti on Instagram. They'll find me at
at Turri on, on X, although I spend much
less time there, and they'll find me at at
Tri Munti on sub stack.
Great, so Luke, thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
really nice and fun to talk with you about.
I've really enjoyed talking with you Ricardo, and I'm
very, very honored to be finally on a podcast
that I've been listening to for almost a decade.
So great to meet you finally.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.